PAGE 1
Unsupervised Learning
Szu-Chi Chung
Department of Applied Mathematics, National Sun Yat-sen University


PAGE 2
Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised vs Supervised Learning:
Most of this course focuses on supervised learning methods such as regression and 
classification
In that setting we observe both a set of features 𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑝for each object, as well as a 
response or outcome variable 𝑌. The goal is then to predict 𝑌using 𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑝
Here, we instead focus on unsupervised learning, where we observe only the features 
𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑝. We are not interested in prediction, because we do not have an associated 
response variable 𝑌
2


PAGE 3
Advantages
It is often easier to obtain unlabeled data - from a lab instrument or a computer 
- than labeled data, which can require human intervention
Prepare labeling manuals, categories, hiring humans, creating GUIs, storage pipelines, etc.
Sometimes it is also hard to label the data. For example it is difficult to 
automatically assess the overall sentiment of a movie review: is it favorable or 
not?
Cognitive motivation: How animals / babies learn
3
“The brain has about 1014synapses and we only live for about 
109 seconds. So we have a lot more parameters than data. This 
motivates the idea that we must do a lot of unsupervised 
learning” - Geoffrey Hinton


PAGE 4
The Challenge/Promising of Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised learning is more subjective than supervised learning, as there is 
no simple goal for the analysis, such as prediction of a response
Unsupervised learning is often performed as part of an exploratory data analysis
But techniques for unsupervised learning are of growing importance in a 
number of fields:
Subgroups of cancer patients grouped by their gene expression measurements,
Groups of shoppers characterized by their browsing and purchase histories,
Movies grouped by the ratings assigned by movie viewers,
Search engine based on the click histories of other individuals with similar search patterns
4


PAGE 5
The Goals of Unsupervised Learning
1.
Dimensional reduction: Speedup the training and overcome the curse of 
dimensionality. In addition, reduce the dimension also helps visualization
2.
Clustering methods: Great tool for data analysis, recommender systems, 
search engines, semi-supervised learning, image segmentation, 
dimensionality reduction and more
3.
Anomaly detection methods: Learn what “normal” data looks like, and use 
this to detect abnormal instances, such as defective items on a production line 
or a new trend in a time series
4.
Density estimation methods: Estimating the probability density function 
(PDF) of the dataset. This is commonly used for anomaly detection: instances 
located in very low-density regions are likely to be anomalies. It is also 
useful for data analysis, visualization and generation
5


PAGE 6
What we would like to address
We discuss two families of methods:
1.
Dimensional reduction and visualization by projection or manifold learning
Principal components analysis (PCA), a tool used for data visualization or data pre-
processing before supervised techniques are applied, and
t-SNE, the state-of-the art visualization method that allows you understand the local 
(sometimes global) structure your data
2.
Clustering, a class of methods for discovering unknown subgroups in data
𝐾-means, the fastest and intuitive algorithm when the number of cluster is not large
Hierarchical clustering, a fast and powerful clustering algorithm when the number of 
cluster is large
DBSCAN (or HDBSCAN), one of the state-of-the art clustering algorithm for EDA 
6


PAGE 7
Dimensional reduction by linear projection
In most real-world problems, training instances are not spread out uniformly 
across all dimensions
Many features are almost constant, while others are highly correlated As a result, all 
training instances actually lie within much lower-dimensional subspace of the high-
dimensional space
Dimensionality reduction tries to preserve various measure or structure in high dimensional 
space like distance, topology, density etc
7


PAGE 8
Principal Components Analysis (PCA)
Suppose that we wish to visualize 𝑛observations with measurements on a set 
of 𝑝features, 𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑝, as part of an exploratory data analysis
We could exam two-dimensional scatterplots of the data, each contains 𝑛observations’ 
measurements on two of the features. However, there are 𝑝
2 such scatterplots
Most likely none of them will be informative since they each contain just a small fraction 
of the total information present in the data set 
Clearly, a better method is required to visualize the 𝑛observations when 𝑝is 
large. We would like to find a low-dimensional representation of the data that 
captures as much of the information as possible 
8


PAGE 9
Principal Components Analysis (PCA)
PCA produces a low-dimensional representation of a dataset. It finds a 
sequence of linear combinations of the variables that have maximal variance
The information is measured by the amount that the observations vary along each dimension
Apart from producing derived variables for use in supervised learning problems, PCA also 
serves as a tool for data visualization
9
https://towardsdatascience.com/visualising-high-dimensional-datasets-using-pca-and-t-sne-in-python-8ef87e7915b


PAGE 10
Principal Components Analysis: details
The first principal component score of a set of features 𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑝is the 
normalized linear combination of the features
𝑍1 = Φ11𝑋1 + Φ21𝑋2 + ⋯+ Φ𝑝1𝑋𝑝
that has the largest variance
By normalized, we mean that σ𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗1
2 = 1, . since otherwise setting these elements to be 
arbitrarily large in absolute value could result in an arbitrarily large variance
We refer to the elements Φ11, … , Φ𝑝1 as the loadings of the first principal component; 
together, the loadings make up the principal component, Φ1 = (Φ11Φ21 … Φ𝑝1)𝑇
For a dataset that have been centered, we look for the linear combination of
𝑧𝑖1 = Φ11𝑥𝑖1 + Φ21𝑥𝑖2 + ⋯+ Φ𝑝1𝑥𝑖𝑝
for 𝑖= 1, … , 𝑛that has largest sample variance, subject to the constraint that 
σ𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗1
2 = 1
10


PAGE 11
Principal Components Analysis: details
The sample variance of the 𝑧𝑖1 can be written as
1
𝑛σ𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑧𝑖1
2 =
1
𝑛σ𝑖=1
𝑛(σ𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗1𝑥𝑖𝑗)2
The first principal component loading vector solves the optimization problem
max
Φ11,…,Φ𝑝1
1
𝑛σ𝑖=1
𝑛(σ𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗1𝑥𝑖𝑗)2 subject to σ𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗1
2 = 1
This problem can be solved via a singular-value decomposition of the data matrix 𝑋or the 
eigenvalue decomposition of the covariance matrix 𝑋
The loading vector Φ1 with elements Φ11, Φ21, … Φ𝑝1 denfies a direction in feature 
space along which the data vary the most
If we project the 𝑛data points 𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝑛onto this direction, the projected values 
are the principal component scores 𝑧11, … , 𝑧𝑛1 themselves
11


PAGE 12
Further principal components
The second principal component is the linear combination of 𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑝that 
has maximal variance that are uncorrelated with 𝑍1
The second principal component scores 𝑧12, … , 𝑧𝑛2 take the form
𝑧𝑖2 = Φ12𝑥𝑖1 + Φ22𝑥𝑖2 + ⋯+ Φ𝑝2𝑥𝑖𝑝
Where Φ2 is the second principal component loading vector, with elements Φ12, Φ22, … Φp2
It turns out that constraining 𝑍2 to be uncorrelated with 𝑍1 is equivalent to 
constraining the direction Φ2 to be orthogonal (perpendicular) to the direction 
Φ1. And so on
There are at most min(𝑛−1, 𝑝) principal components
12


PAGE 13
PCA: example
The population size (pop) and ad spending (ad) for 100 different cities are 
shown as purple circles 
The green solid line indicates the first principal component direction, and the 
blue dashed line indicates the second principal component direction
13


PAGE 14
Illustration
USAarrests data: For each of the 50 states in the United States, the data set 
contains the number of arrests per 100,000 residents for each of three crimes: 
Assault, Murder, and Rape. We also record UrbanPop (the percent of the 
population in each state living in urban areas)
The principal component score vectors have length 𝑛= 50, and the principal 
component loading vectors have length 𝑝= 4
PCA was performed after standardizing each variable to have mean zero and 
standard deviation one
14


PAGE 15
USAarrests data: PCA biplot
15


PAGE 16
Figure details
The first two principal components for the USArrests data
The blue state names represent the scores for the first two principal 
components
The orange arrows indicate the first two principal component loading vectors 
(with axes on the top and right). For example, the loading for Rape on the first 
component is 0.54, and its loading on the second principal component 0.17 [the 
word Rape is centered at the point (0.54; 0.17)]
This figure is known as a biplot, because it displays both the principal 
component scores and the principal component loadings
16


PAGE 17
Another Interpretation of Principal Components
Principal components provide low-dimensional linear surfaces that are 
closest to the observations
17


PAGE 18
Another Interpretation of Principal Components
The first principal component loading vector has a very special property: it is 
the line in 𝑝-dimensional space that is closest to the 𝑛observations (using 
average squared Euclidean distance as a measure of closeness)
The notion of principal components as the dimensions that are closest to the 𝑛
observations extends beyond just the first principal component
For instance, the first two principal components of a dataset span the plane that is closest to 
the 𝑛observations, in terms of average squared Euclidean distance
18


PAGE 19
Another interpretation of principal components
The first 𝑀principal component score vectors and the first 𝑀principal 
component loading vectors provide the best 𝑀-dimensional approximation (in 
terms of Euclidean distance) to the 𝑖th observation 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑥𝑖𝑗≈෍
𝑚=1
𝑀
𝑧𝑖𝑚Φ𝑗𝑚
Suppose the data matrix 𝑋is column-centered. Out of all approximations of the 
form 𝑥𝑖𝑗≈σ𝑚=1
𝑀
𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑏𝑗𝑚. We have
min
𝐴∈𝑅𝑛×𝑀, 𝐵∈𝑅𝑝×𝑀{෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
෍
𝑖=1
𝑛
(𝑥𝑖𝑗−෍
𝑚=1
𝑀
𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑏𝑗𝑚)2}
It can be shown that for any value of 𝑀, the columns of the matrices መ𝐴and ෠𝐵
are in fact the first 𝑀principal components score and loading vectors
19


PAGE 20
More on PCA – Proportion Variance Explained
We are interested in knowing the proportion of variance explained (PVE) by each 
one. The total variance present in a data set (assuming that the variables have 
been centered to have mean zero) is defined as
෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑋𝑗) = ෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
1
𝑛෍
𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑥𝑖𝑗
2 ,
and the variance explained by the 𝑚th principal component is
𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑍𝑚= 1
𝑛෍
𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑧𝑖𝑚
2 = 1
𝑛෍
𝑖=1
𝑛
(෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗𝑚𝑥𝑖𝑗)2
It can be shown that σ𝑗=1
𝑝
𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑋𝑗) = σ𝑚=1
𝑀
𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑍𝑚), with 𝑀= min(𝑛−1, 𝑝)
σ𝑗=1
𝑝
1
𝑛σ𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑥𝑖𝑗
2 = σ𝑚=1
𝑀
1
𝑛σ𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑧𝑖𝑚
2 + 1
𝑛σ𝑗=1
𝑝
σ𝑖=1
𝑛(𝑥𝑖𝑗−σ𝑚=1
𝑀
Φ𝑗𝑚𝑧𝑖𝑚)2 (c.f. here)
20


PAGE 21
Proportion Variance Explained: continued
Therefore, the PVE of the 𝑚th principal component is given by the positive 
quantity between 0 and 1
σ𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑧𝑖𝑚
2
σ𝑗=1
𝑝
σ𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑥𝑖𝑗
2 =
σ𝑖=1
𝑛(σ𝑗=1
𝑝
Φ𝑗𝑚𝑥𝑖𝑗)2
σ𝑗=1
𝑝
σ𝑖=1
𝑛
𝑥𝑖𝑗
2
The PVEs sum to one. We sometimes display the cumulative PVEs
21


PAGE 22
More on PCA - How many principal components should we use?
If we use principal components as a summary of our data, how many 
components are sufficient?
No simple answer to this question, as cross-validation is not easy for this purpose
The “scree plot” on the previous slide can be used as a guide: we look for an 
“elbow”
Information criterion can be used instead, however, in high dimensional setting 
the selection is quite challenge
22


PAGE 23
More on PCA - Scaling of the variables matters
If the variables are in different units, scaling each to have standard deviation 
equal to one is recommended
If they are in the same units, you might or might not scale the variables
23


PAGE 24
More on PCA – Uniqueness
Each principal component loading vector is unique, up to a sign flip
This means that two different software packages will yield the same principal component 
loading vectors although the signs of those loading vectors may diﬀer
The signs may differ because each principal component loading vector specifies a direction 
in 𝑝-dimensional space: flipping the sign has no effect as the direction does not change. 
Similarly, the score vectors are unique up to a sign flip, since the variance of 𝑍is the same 
as the variance of −𝑍
24


PAGE 25
More on PCA – Connection with SVD and EVD
Let the data matrix 𝑋be a 𝑛by 𝑝data matrix
The sample covariance matrix
𝑆=
Τ
𝑋𝑇𝑋𝑛= ෍
𝑖=1
𝑛
(𝑥𝑖−ҧ𝑥)(𝑥𝑖−ҧ𝑥)𝑇/𝑛
Find a direction vector 𝑣1 ∈𝑅𝑝and 𝑣1
𝑇𝑣1 = 1 such that the variance of the 
projected data is maximized
1
𝑛෍
𝑖=1
𝑛
(𝑥𝑖
𝑇𝑣1 −ҧ𝑥𝑇𝑣1)2 = 𝑣1
𝑇𝑆𝑣1
25


PAGE 26
More on PCA – Connection with SVD and EVD
To enforce the constraint, we introduce a  Lagrange multiplier denoted by 𝜆1
and get the unconstrained maximization of 
𝑣1
𝑇𝑆𝑣1 + λ1(1 −𝑣1
𝑇𝑣1) or maximized the Rayleigh quotient 𝑣𝑇𝑆𝑣
𝑣𝑇𝑣
By setting the derivative with respect to 𝑣1 equal to zero, we see that this quantity will 
have a stationary point when (c.f. matrix cookbook)
𝑆𝑣1 = λ1𝑣1
26


PAGE 27
More on PCA – Connection with SVD and EVD
𝑣1 must be an eigenvector of 𝑆, if we left-multiply by 𝑣1
𝑇we get
𝑣1
𝑇𝑆𝑣1 = λ1
and so the variance will be a maximum when we set 𝑣1 equal to the eigenvector having the 
largest eigenvalue λ1. This eigenvector is known as the ﬁrst principal component
We can deﬁne additional principal components in an incremental fashion by 
choosing each new direction to be that which maximizes the projected variance 
amongst all possible directions orthogonal to those already considered.
In a 𝑀-dimensional projection space, we now consider the optimal linear projection for which 
the variance of the projected data is maximized is deﬁned by the 𝑀eigenvectors 𝑣1, … , 𝑣𝑀of 
the data covariance matrix S corresponding to the 𝑀largest eigenvalues λ1, … , λ𝑀. 
27


PAGE 28
More on PCA – Connection with SVD and EVD
If we collect eigenvectors and eigenvalues into matrix forms the connection 
with EVD
𝑆𝑝×𝑝𝑉𝑝×𝑝= 𝑉𝑝×𝑝Λ𝑝×𝑝
𝑆𝑝×𝑝= 𝑉𝑝×𝑝Λ𝑝×𝑝𝑉𝑝×𝑝
𝑇
Connection with SVD
S = 𝑋𝑇𝑋
𝑛
= 𝑉𝐷𝑈𝑇𝑈𝐷𝑉𝑇
𝑛
= 𝑉𝐷2
𝑛𝑉𝑇= 𝑉Λ𝑉𝑇
Note 𝑋= 𝑈𝐷𝑉𝑇
Scores are  𝑋𝑉= 𝑈𝐷
We can perform randomized SVD
28


PAGE 29
Other Uses for Principal Components
We saw in Chapter 6 that we can perform regression using the principal 
component score vectors as features
In fact, many statistical techniques, such as regression, classiﬁcation, and clustering, can be 
easily adapted to use the 𝑛× 𝑀matrix whose columns are the ﬁrst 𝑀≪𝑝principal 
component score vectors, rather than using the full n × p data matrix
This can lead to less noisy results, since it is often the case that the signal (as opposed to 
the noise) in a data set is concentrated in its ﬁrst few principal components!
29


PAGE 30
Missing Values and Matrix Completion
Often datasets have missing values, which can be a nuisance. How should we 
proceed?
1.
We could remove the rows that contain missing observations and perform our 
data analysis on the complete rows
But this seems wasteful, and depending on the fraction missing
2.
Alternatively, if 𝑥𝑖𝑗is missing, then we could replace it by the mean of the 
𝑗th column (using the non-missing entries to compute the mean)
Although this is a common and convenient strategy, often we can do better by exploiting 
the correlation between the variables
30


PAGE 31
Missing Values and Matrix Completion
We show how principal components can be used to impute the missing values, 
through a process known as matrix completion if the data is missing at random
The complete matrix can then be used in a statistical learning method, such as 
linear regression or LDA
In practice, sometimes data is missing by necessity 
For example, if we form a matrix of the ratings (on a scale from 1 to 5) that 𝑛customers 
have given to the entire Netflix catalog of 𝑝movies, then most of the matrix will be 
missing, since no customer will have seen and rated more than a tiny fraction of the catalog
If we can impute the missing values well, then we will have an idea of what each customer 
will think of movies they have not yet seen
31


PAGE 32
Principal Components with Missing Values
The first 𝑀principal component score and loading vectors provide the “best” 
approximation to the data matrix 𝑋
Now, some of the observations 𝑥𝑖𝑗are missing. One can both impute the 
missing values and solve the principal component problem at the same time
min
𝐴∈𝑅𝑛×𝑀, 𝐵∈𝑅𝑝×𝑀{ ෍
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝑂
(𝑥𝑖𝑗−෍
𝑚=1
𝑀
𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑏𝑗𝑚)2}
where 𝑂is the set of all observed pairs of indices (𝑖, 𝑗), a subset of the possible 𝑛×
𝑝pairs
We can estimate a missing observation 𝑥𝑖𝑗using 𝑥𝑖𝑗= σ𝑚=1
𝑀
ො𝑎𝑖𝑚෠𝑏𝑗𝑚
We can (approximately) recover the 𝑀principal component scores and loadings, as we did 
when the data were complete
32


PAGE 33
33


PAGE 34
Example on USArrests data
𝑝= 4 and 𝑛= 50 observations 
(states). We first standardized the 
data 
We then randomly selected 20 of the 
50 states, and then for each of these 
we randomly set one of the four 
variables to be missing. Thus, 10% 
of the elements of the data matrix 
were missing
We applied Algorithm 12.1 with 
𝑀= 1 principal component
34


PAGE 35
Example on USArrests data
Over 100 random runs of this experiment, the average correlation between the 
true and imputed values of the missing elements is 0.63, with a standard 
deviation of 0.11
If we had simply computed ො𝑥𝑖𝑗= 𝑧𝑖1Φ𝑗1, where 𝑧𝑖1 and Φ𝑗1 are elements of the first 
principal component score and loading vectors of the complete data. Using the complete 
data in this way results in an average correlation of 0.79 between the true and estimated 
values for these 20 elements, with a standard deviation of 0.08
Thus, our imputation method does worse than the method that uses all of the data (0.63 ±
0.11 versus 0.79 ± 0.08), but its performance is still pretty good
35


PAGE 36
Example on USArrests data
36


PAGE 37
Recommender Systems
Netflix and Amazon use data about the content that a customer has viewed in 
the past to suggest other content for the customer
Some years back, Netflix had customers rate each movie that they had seen 
with a score from 1–5. This resulted in a very big 𝑛× 𝑝matrix for which the 
(𝑖, 𝑗) element is the rating given by the 𝑖th customer to the 𝑗th movie
Netflix needed a way to impute the missing values of this data matrix
The key idea is as follows: the set of movies that the 𝑖th customer has seen will overlap 
with those that other customers have seen. Furthermore, some of those other customers will 
have similar movie preferences to the 𝑖th customer
By applying Algorithm 12.1, we can predict the 𝑖th customer’s rating for the 𝑗th movie
37


PAGE 38
Recommender Systems
38


PAGE 39
Manifold Learning
A M-dimensional manifold is a part of an p-dimensional space (where M < p) 
that locally resembles a M-dimensional hyperplane 
In the case of the Swiss roll, 𝑀= 2 and 𝑝= 3: it locally resembles a 2D plane, but it is 
bent and twisted in the third dimension
Simply projecting onto a plane would squash different layers of the Swiss roll
Many dimensionality reduction algorithms work by modeling the manifold on 
which the training instances lie; this is called Manifold Learning
39


PAGE 40
Manifold Learning
Make sure the same scale is used over all features
Because manifold learning methods are based on a nearest-neighbor search, the algorithm 
may perform poorly otherwise
40
https://www.twblogs.net/a/5bcb6b332b7177796822b307


PAGE 41
t-SNE (t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding)
t-SNE is popular manifold learning method that is specialized for visualization 
and EDA
1.
It is a statistical method for visualizing high-dimensional data (𝑥𝑖) by giving each data 
point a location in a two or three-dimensional map (𝑦𝑖)
2.
It converts affinities of data points to probabilities and tends to preserve topology that 
similar objects are modeled by nearby points and dissimilar objects are modeled by 
distant points
3.
It is particularly sensitive to local structure and can revealing the structure at many scales 
or data lie on several manifolds on a single map
4.
However, the global structure is not explicitly preserved and we should use it with 
caution for downstream analysis
41


PAGE 42
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (SNE)
Previous linear or non-linear dimensionality reduction methods have a fixed 
assignment for a data point in the high-dimensional space
SNE aims to best capture neighborhood identity by considering the probability that one point is the 
neighbor of all other points. It defines 𝑛× 𝑛similarity matrix 𝑃in the high dimensional space 
whose entries are
𝑝𝑗|𝑖=
𝑒𝑥𝑝−
(𝑥𝑖−𝑥𝑗)2
2𝜎𝑖
2
σ𝑘≠𝑖𝑒𝑥𝑝−
(𝑥𝑖−𝑥𝑘)2
2𝜎𝑖
2
, 𝑝𝑖|𝑖= 0 and σ𝑗𝑝𝑗|𝑖= 1
From the definition of 𝑃, note that SNE focuses on local structure because farther points result in 
smaller 𝑝𝑗|𝑖and closer points result in greater 𝑝𝑗|𝑖
and 𝑛× 𝑛similarity matrix 𝑄in the low dimensional space whose entries are
𝑞𝑗|𝑖=
𝑒𝑥𝑝−(𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗)2
σ𝑘≠𝑖𝑒𝑥𝑝−(𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑘)2 , 𝑞𝑖|𝑖= 0
42


PAGE 43
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
𝑃𝑖= {𝑝1|𝑖, 𝑝2|𝑖, … , 𝑝𝑛|𝑖} and 𝑄𝑖= {𝑞1|𝑖, 𝑞2|𝑖, … , 𝑞𝑛|𝑖} are the distributions on 
the neighbors of datapoint 𝑖. The cost function that SNE want to minimize is 
the Kullback-Leibler divergence over 𝑃and 𝑄
𝐶= ෍
𝑖
𝐾𝐿𝑃𝑖||𝑄𝑖= ෍
𝑖
෍
𝑗
𝑝𝑗|𝑖log
𝑝𝑗|𝑖
𝑞𝑗|𝑖
Using far away points to represent similar object will induce more cost than using nearby 
points to represent dissimilar objects (𝑞𝑗|𝑖= 0.2 for 𝑝𝑗|𝑖= 0.8, 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡= 1.11. 𝑞𝑗|𝑖=0.8 for 
𝑝𝑗|𝑖=0.2, 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡= −0.277), thus, SNE prefer to preserve local structure
The gradient of 𝐶is 
𝛿𝐶
𝛿𝑦𝑖
= 2 ෍
𝑗
𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗
𝑝𝑗|𝑖−𝑞𝑗|𝑖+ 𝑝𝑖|𝑗−𝑞𝑖|𝑗
43


PAGE 44
The problem of SNE
SNE suffers from the "crowding problem". Intuitively, there is less space in a 
lower dimension to accommodate moderately distant data points originally in 
higher dimension
44


PAGE 45
t-distribution
𝑡-SNE use 𝑡distribution rather than a 
Gaussian to compute the similarity in the 
low-dimensional space to alleviate the 
crowding problem
𝑞𝑖𝑗=
1 + (𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗)2 −1
σ𝑘≠𝑖1 + (𝑦𝑘−𝑦𝑖)2 −1
The heavy tails of the 𝑡kernel allow 
dissimilar 𝑥𝑖and 𝑥𝑗to be modeled by 𝑦𝑖
and 𝑦𝑗that are far apart
It also alleviate the outlier problem
45


PAGE 46
Symmetry
𝑡-SNE has a symmetrized version of the SNE cost function with simpler 
gradients 
In SNE, 𝑝𝑗|𝑖≠𝑝𝑖|𝑗due to perplexity (perplexity is proportional to 𝜎)
Thus, in t-SNE 𝑝𝑖𝑗is defined instead as 
𝑝𝑖𝑗=
𝑝𝑗|𝑖+ 𝑝𝑖|𝑗
2𝑛
, 𝑝𝑖𝑖= 0 and ෍
𝑖,𝑗
𝑝𝑖𝑗= 1
The gradient of the cost function is:
𝛿𝐶
𝛿𝑦𝑖= 4 σ𝑗=1,𝑗≠𝑖
𝑛
𝑝𝑖𝑗−𝑞𝑖𝑗𝑞𝑖𝑗𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗
1 + (𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗)2 −1
= 4 σ𝑗≠𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑗𝑞𝑖𝑗𝑍𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗−σ𝑗≠𝑖𝑞𝑖𝑗
2 𝑍𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗
𝑍= ෍
𝑗≠𝑖
1 + (𝑦𝑖−𝑦𝑗)2 −1
46


PAGE 47
t-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
Input: Dataset 𝑋= {𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑛} ∈𝑅𝑝, perplexity 𝑘, exaggeration parameter 𝛼, 
step size ℎ> 0, number of rounds 𝑇∈𝑁
1. Initialize 𝑦1
(0), 𝑦2
(0), … , 𝑦𝑛
(0) from the uniform distribution on [−0.01,0.01]2
2. For 𝑡= 0 to 𝑇−1 do
𝑍(𝑡) ←෍
𝑖,𝑗,𝑖≠𝑗
1 + (𝑦𝑖
(𝑡) −𝑦𝑗
(𝑡))2 −1
𝑦𝑖
(𝑡+1) ←𝑦𝑖
(𝑡) + ℎ෍
𝑗=1,𝑗≠𝑖
𝑛
𝛼𝑝𝑖𝑗−𝑞𝑖𝑗
(𝑡) 𝑞𝑖𝑗
(𝑡)𝑍(𝑡) 𝑦𝑖
(𝑡) −𝑦𝑗
(𝑡)
𝑖= 1 … 𝑛
3. Output 2D embedding Y = {𝑦1
(T), … , 𝑦𝑛
(T)} ∈𝑅2
47


PAGE 48
t-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
48


PAGE 49
Parameters
There are five parameters that control the optimization of t-SNE and therefore 
possibly the quality of the resulting embedding:
Perplexity 𝑘
𝑘is effectively the number of nearest neighbors t-SNE considers when generating the 
conditional probabilities. Larger perplexities lead to more nearest neighbors and less 
sensitive to small structures and generally, is chosen to take values between 5 and 50
2. Early exaggeration factor
The optimization consists of two phases: the early exaggeration phase and the final 
optimization. During early exaggeration, the joint probabilities in the original space will be 
artificially increased by multiplication with a given factor 
This encourages the algorithm to focus on modeling large 𝑝𝑖𝑗by fairly large 𝑞𝑖𝑗which will 
improve the convergence speed and larger factors result in larger gaps between natural 
clusters in the data
49


PAGE 50
Parameters
3. Learning rate
If it is too low gradient descent will get stuck in a bad local minimum. If it is too high the 
KL divergence will increase during optimization. A heuristic suggested in opt-SNE is to set 
the learning rate to the sample size divided by the early exaggeration factor
4. Maximum number of iterations
Usually high enough and does not need any tuning
5. Angle (not used in the exact method, but use in the Barnes-Hut t-SNE)
Tradeoff between performance and accuracy. Larger angles imply that we can approximate 
larger regions by a single point, leading to better speed but less accurate results
Make sure the same scale is used over all features. Because manifold learning 
methods are based on a nearest-neighbor search
50


PAGE 51
Caveats
First, the perplexity parameter needs to be chosen carefully
Varying perplexity can give drastically different visualizations that show different structures
A more direct way to think about perplexity is that it is the continuous analogy to the 𝑘
number of nearest neighbors for which we will preserve distances
51
https://distill.pub/2016/misread-tsne/


PAGE 52
Coordinates after embedding have no meaning. The global structure is not 
preserve and the results obtain in each run may be different
This problem is mitigated by initializing points with PCA (using init='pca')
The density also not preserved
52


PAGE 53
Caveats
t-SNE does not work well for general dimensionality problem where the 
embedded dimension is greater than 2D or 3D
O(𝑀𝑛2) computational complexity. But can be reduced to 𝑂(𝑀𝑛log 𝑛) using Barnes-Hut 
t-SNE which only works for the target dimensionality is smaller than 3 and dense dataset. 
The flt-tsne or UMAP can be use to give linear scalability
We can also add new data point into the embedding by parametric t-SNE 
There are more and more theoretical guarantee for t-SNE. See here and here
t-SNE is generally very good at capture local structure and best tool for visualization
Noise may appear to have some structure and cluster may not discover by t-SNE 
Generally, we do not use t-SNE for clustering purpose
See here for more experiments
UMAP on the other hand can be used as a preprocessing methods
53


PAGE 54
Cluster analysis
Clustering refers to techniques for finding subgroups, or clusters, in a data set. 
We seek a partition of the data into distinct groups so that the observations 
within each group are quite similar to each other
1.
Once a dataset has been clustered, it is possible to measure each instance’s affinity with 
each cluster which reduce to 𝑘dimensional space (feature/representation learning)
2.
We can cluster observations on the basis of the features in order to identify subgroups 
among the observations, or we can cluster features on the basis of the observations in order 
to discover subgroups among the features (feature clustering)
3.
For semi-supervised learning: if you only have a few labels, you could perform clustering 
and propagate the labels to all the instances in the same cluster
4.
For anomaly detection: any instance that has a low affinity to all the clusters is likely to be 
an anomaly
54


PAGE 55
Clustering vs PCA
Both clustering and PCA seek to simplify the data via a small number of 
summaries, but their mechanisms are different:
PCA looks for a low-dimensional representation of the observations that explains a good 
fraction of the variance
Clustering looks for homogeneous subgroups among the observations
In clustering, to make the affinity concrete, we must define what it means for 
two or more observations to be similar or different
Indeed, this is often a domain-specific consideration that must be made based on 
knowledge of the data being studied
Metric learning may be helpful in this case
55


PAGE 56
Good EDA clustering algorithm
1.
Don’t be wrong: If you are doing EDA you are trying to learn and gain intuitions about 
your data. In that case it is far better to get no result at all than a result that is wrong. This 
means a good EDA clustering algorithm needs to conservative in it’s clustering
2.
Intuitive Parameters: If you know little about your data it can be hard to determine what 
value or setting a parameter should have. This means parameters need to be intuitive 
enough that you can hopefully set them without having to know a lot about your data
3.
Stable Clusters: If you run the algorithm twice with a different random initialization, you 
should expect to get roughly the same clusters back. If you are sampling your data, taking a 
different random sample shouldn’t change much. If you vary the clustering algorithm 
parameters you want the clustering to change in a somewhat stable predictable fashion
4.
Performance: You can sub-sample, but ultimately you need a clustering algorithm that can 
scale to large data sizes. A clustering algorithm isn’t much use if you can only use it if you 
take such a small sub-sample that it is no longer representative of the data at large!
56


PAGE 57
57
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html


PAGE 58
Three clustering methods
1.
In 𝐾-means clustering, we seek to partition the observations into a pre-
specified number of clusters
2.
In hierarchical clustering, we do not know in advance how many clusters we 
want; in fact, we end up with a tree-like visual representation of the 
observations, called a dendrogram, that allows us to view at once the 
clustering obtained for each possible number of clusters, from 1 to 𝑛
3.
In DBSCAN, we do not know in advance how many clusters we want. In 
addition, it doesn’t require that every point be assigned to a cluster and hence 
doesn’t partition the data, but instead extracts the ‘dense’ clusters and leaves 
sparse background classified as ‘noise’
58


PAGE 59
Details of K-means clustering
A simulated data set with 150 observations in 2-dimensional space. The color 
of each observation indicates the cluster to which it was assigned using the 𝐾-
means clustering algorithm
The cluster labels were not used in clustering; instead, they are the outputs of 
the clustering procedure
59


PAGE 60
Details of K-means clustering
Let 𝐶1, … , 𝐶𝐾denote sets containing the indices of the observations in each 
cluster. These sets satisfy two properties:
1.
𝐶1 ∪𝐶2 ∪⋯∪𝐶𝐾= 1, … , 𝑛. In other words, each observation belongs to at 
least one of the 𝐾clusters
2.
𝐶𝑘∩𝐶𝑘′ = 0 for all 𝑘≠𝑘′. In other words, the clusters are non-overlapping: 
no observation belongs to more than one cluster (In contrast to fuzzy 
clustering)
For instance, if the 𝑖th observation is in the 𝑘th cluster, then 𝑖∈𝐶𝑘
60


PAGE 61
Details of K-means clustering: continued
The idea behind K-means clustering is that a good clustering is one for which 
the within-cluster variation is as small as possible
The within-cluster variation for cluster 𝐶𝑘is a measure 𝑊(𝐶𝑘) of the amount by which the 
observations within a cluster diﬀer from each other
Hence we want to solve the problem
min
𝐶1,…,𝐶𝑘{෍
𝑘=1
𝐾
W(𝐶𝑘)}
In words, this formula says that we want to partition the observations into 𝐾clusters such 
that the total within-cluster variation, summed over all 𝐾clusters, is as small as possible
61


PAGE 62
How to deﬁne within-cluster variation?
Typically we use Euclidean distance
𝑊(𝐶𝑘)=
1
|𝐶𝑘| σ𝑖,𝑖′∈𝐶𝑘σ𝑗=1
𝑝
(𝑥𝑖𝑗−𝑥𝑖′𝑗)2,
Where |𝐶𝑘| denotes the number of observations in the 𝑘th cluster
Combining previous two equation gives the optimization problem which 
minimize the following objective function that deﬁnes 𝐾-means clustering,
min
𝐶1,…,𝐶𝑘{෍
𝑘=1
𝐾
1
|𝐶𝑘| ෍
𝑖,𝑖′∈𝐶𝑘
෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
(𝑥𝑖𝑗−𝑥𝑖′𝑗)2}
There are 𝐾𝑛ways to partition 𝑛observation into 𝐾clusters!
Fortunately, a very simple algorithm can be shown to provide a local optimum
62


PAGE 63
Details of K-means clustering
63


PAGE 64
Properties of the Algorithm
This algorithm is guaranteed to decrease the value of the objective function at 
each step. Note that (exercise 1)
1
|𝐶𝑘| ෍
𝑖,𝑖′∈𝐶𝑘
෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
(𝑥𝑖𝑗−𝑥𝑖′𝑗)2 = 2 ෍
𝑖∈𝐶𝑘
෍
𝑗=1
𝑝
(𝑥𝑖𝑗−ҧ𝑥𝑘𝑗)2
Where ҧ𝑥𝑘𝑗=
1
|𝐶𝑘| σ𝑖∈𝐶𝑘𝑥𝑖𝑗is the mean for feature 𝑗in cluster 𝐶𝑘
However it is not guaranteed to give the global minimum
It is close related to Gaussian mixture model
64


PAGE 65
Example
65


PAGE 66
Details of previous figure
The progress of the 𝐾-means algorithm with 𝐾= 3
Top left: The observations are shown
Top center: In Step 1 of the algorithm, each observation is randomly assigned to a cluster
Top right: In Step 2(a), the cluster centroids are computed. These are shown as large 
colored disks. Initially the centroids are almost completely overlapping because the initial 
cluster assignments were chosen at random
Bottom left: In Step 2(b), each observation is assigned to the nearest centroid
Bottom center: Step 2(a) is once again performed, leading to new cluster centroids
Bottom right: The results obtained after 10 iterations
66


PAGE 67
Example: diﬀerent starting values and different 𝐾
67


PAGE 68
Details of previous figure
𝐾-means clustering performed six times on the data from previous ﬁgure with 
𝐾= 3, each time with a diﬀerent random assignment of the observations in 
Step 1 of the 𝐾-means algorithm
Above each plot is the value of the objective function
Three diﬀerent local optima were obtained, one of which resulted in a smaller 
value of the objective and provides better separation between the clusters
Those labeled in red all achieved the same best solution, with an objective 
value of 235.8
68


PAGE 69
Hierarchical Clustering
𝐾-means clustering requires us to pre-specify the number of clusters 𝐾. This 
can be a disadvantage
Hierarchical clustering is an alternative approach which does not require that 
we commit to a particular choice of 𝐾
In this section, we describe bottom-up or agglomerative clustering (cf. divisive clustering). 
This is the most common type of hierarchical clustering, and refers to the fact that a 
dendrogram is built starting from the leaves and combining clusters up to the trunk
It can also be used as an effective feature clustering (dimension reduction) method
69


PAGE 70
Agglomerative (bottom up) Clustering
Start with each point in it’s own cluster and then, for each cluster, use some 
criterion to choose another cluster to merge with
Do this repeatedly until you have only one cluster and you get a hierarchy, or binary tree, 
of clusters branching down to the last layer which has a leaf for each point in the dataset
70


PAGE 71
An example dataset
45 observations generated in 2-
dimensional space. In reality there 
are three distinct classes, shown in 
separate colors
However, we will treat these class 
labels as unknown and will seek to 
cluster the observations in order to 
discover the classes from the data
71


PAGE 72
Application of hierarchical clustering
72


PAGE 73
Details of previous figure
Left: Dendrogram obtained from hierarchically clustering the data from 
previous slide, with complete linkage and Euclidean distance
Center: The dendrogram from the left-hand panel, cut at a height of 9 
(indicated by the dashed line). This cut results in two distinct clusters, shown in 
different colors
Right: The dendrogram from the left-hand panel, now cut at a height of 5. This 
cut results in three distinct clusters, shown in different colors
One single dendrogram can be used to obtain any number of clusters. In 
practice, people often look at the dendrogram and select by eye a sensible 
number of clusters, based on the heights of the fusion and the number of 
clusters desired
73


PAGE 74
Assumption behind Hierarchical Clustering
The term hierarchical refers to the fact that clusters obtained by cutting the 
dendrogram at a given height are necessarily nested within the clusters 
obtained by cutting the dendrogram at any greater height
Suppose that our observations correspond to a group of men and women, evenly split 
among Americans, Japanese, and French. We can imagine a scenario in which the best 
division into two groups might split these people by gender, and the best division into three 
groups might split them by nationality 
In this case, the true clusters are not nested, in the sense that the best division into three 
groups does not result from taking the best division into two groups and splitting up one of 
those groups
74


PAGE 75
Another Example
An illustration of how to properly interpret a 
dendrogram with nine observations in two-dimensional 
space. The raw data on the bottom was used to generate 
the dendrogram on the top
Observations 5 and 7 are quite similar to each other, as are 
observations 1 and 6
However, observation 9 is no more similar to observation 2 
than it is to observations 8, 5, and 7, even though observations 
9 and 2 are close together in terms of horizontal distance
This is because observations 2, 8, 5; and 7 all fuse with 
observation 9 at the same height, approximately 1.8
75


PAGE 76
Merges in previous example
76


PAGE 77
Hierarchical Clustering
How did we determine that the cluster {5, 7} should be fused with the cluster 
{8}?
77


PAGE 78
Types of Linkage
Linkage
Description
Complete
Maximal intercluster dissimilarity (distance). Compute all pairwise dissimilarities 
between the observations in cluster A and the observations in cluster B, and record 
the largest of these dissimilarities
Single
Minimal intercluster dissimilarity. Compute all pairwise dissimilarities between the 
observations in cluster A and the observations in cluster B, and record the smallest
of these dissimilarities
Average
Mean intercluster dissimilarity. Compute all pairwise dissimilarities between the 
observations in cluster A and the observations in cluster B, and record the average of 
these dissimilarities
Centroid
Dissimilarity between the centroid for cluster A (a mean vector of length 𝑝) and the 
centroid for cluster B. Centroid linkage can result in undesirable inversions
Ward
The difference between the pre and post variance. It is a variance-minimizing 
approach and in this sense is similar to the k-means objective function
78


PAGE 79
Types of Linkage
79


PAGE 80
Types of Linkage
Agglomerative cluster has a “rich get 
richer” behavior that leads to uneven 
cluster sizes
Single linkage seems like the worst strategy, 
and Ward gives the most regular sizes
However, the affinity cannot be varied 
with Ward, thus for non Euclidean metrics, 
average linkage is a good alternative
Single linkage, while not robust to noisy 
data, can be computed very efficiently. It  
can also perform well on non-globular 
data
80


PAGE 81
Density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise
(DBSCAN) (OPTICS, HDBSCAN)
DBSCAN is a density based algorithm. It is also the actual clustering 
algorithm: it doesn’t require that every point be assigned to a cluster and hence 
doesn’t partition the data, but instead extracts the ‘dense’ clusters and leaves 
sparse background classified as ‘noise’
A point p is a core point if at least minPts points are within distance ε of it 
(including p). Find the reachable points and clustered all points that are 
reachable
81
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DBSCAN


PAGE 82
DBSCAN
1.
Picking an arbitrary point and if there are more than minPts points within a 
distance ε from the point, we consider all of them to as a "cluster". We then 
expand that cluster by checking all of the new points and seeing if they have 
more than minPts points within a distance ε, growing the cluster recursively
82
2.
Eventually, we run out of points to add 
to the cluster. We then pick a new 
arbitrary point and repeat the process
3.
It's possible that a point we pick has 
fewer than minPts points in its 𝜀ball, 
and is also not a part of any other cluster. 
Then it is a  "noise point" not belonging 
to any cluster


PAGE 83
DBSCAN
DBSCAN can be seen as special (efficient) variant of spectral clustering:
1.
Clusters don’t need to be globular, and won’t have noise lumped in; varying density 
clusters may cause problems 
2.
DBSCAN is stable across runs (and to some extent subsampling if you re-parameterize 
well); stability over varying 𝜀and 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠is not so good
3.
DBSCAN can be very efficient; few clustering algorithms can tackle datasets as large as 
DBSCAN can
4.
𝜀is a distance value. In practice, however, this isn’t an especially intuitive parameter, nor 
is it easy to get right
83


PAGE 84
Hierarchical DBSCAN (HDBSCAN)
The goal was to allow varying density clusters. It extends DBSCAN by 
converting it into a hierarchical clustering algorithm
84
https://axk51013.medium.com/2021%E5%B9%B4%E8%B3%87%E6
%96%99%E7%A7%91%E5%AD%B8%E5%AE%B6%E5%BF%85%
E5%82%99%E5%88%86%E7%BE%A4%E6%B3%95hdbscan%E7%
B0%A1%E4%BB%8B-fba8287e666c


PAGE 85
Hierarchical DBSCAN (HDBSCAN)
Instead of taking an 𝜀value and 
minPts, we have a new parameter 
min_cluster_size which is used to 
determine whether points are 
‘falling out of a cluster’ or splitting 
to form two new clusters
This trades an unintuitive parameter for 
one that is not so hard to choose for 
EDA 
85


PAGE 86
Choice of dissimilarity measure
So far have used Euclidean distance
An alternative is correlation-based distance which considers two observations 
to be similar if their features are highly correlated
Correlation-based distance focuses on the shapes of observation profiles rather than their 
magnitudes
More metrics
86


PAGE 87
Choice of dissimilarity measure
Consider an online retailer interested in clustering shoppers based on 
their past shopping histories
The data takes the form of a matrix where the rows are the shoppers and the 
columns are the items available for purchase; the elements of the data matrix 
indicate the number of times a given shopper has purchased a given item 
If Euclidean distance is used, then shoppers who have bought very few items 
overall will be clustered together. This may not be desirable. On the other hand, if 
correlation-based distance is used, then shoppers with similar preferences will be 
clustered together
87


PAGE 88
Scaling of the variables matters
88


PAGE 89
Practical issues - Validating the clusters obtained
Any time clustering is performed on a data set we find clusters. But we want to 
know whether the clusters that have been found represent true subgroups in the 
data, or whether they are simply a result of clustering the noise 
This is a hard question to answer. There exist a number of techniques for 
assigning a 𝑝-value to a cluster in order to assess whether there is more 
evidence for the cluster than one would expect due to chance. However, there 
has been no consensus on a single best approach
More details can be found in ESL
89


PAGE 90
Practical issues
Both 𝐾-means and hierarchical clustering will assign each observation to a 
cluster. However, sometimes this might not be appropriate
Suppose a small subset of the observations are quite different from each other and from all 
other observations. The clusters found may be heavily distorted due to the presence of 
outliers that do not belong to any cluster 
Mixture models or DBSCAN are an attractive approach for accommodating the presence 
of such outliers
Clustering methods generally are not very robust to perturbations to the data. 
For instance, suppose that we cluster 𝑛observations, and then cluster the 
observations again after removing a subset of the 𝑛observations at random. 
One would hope that the two sets of clusters obtained would be quite similar, 
but often this is not the case!
90


PAGE 91
Practical issues
Clustering can be a very useful and valid statistical tool if used properly 
We mentioned that small decisions in how clustering is performed
Such as how the data are standardized and what type of linkage is used, can have a large 
effect on the results 
Therefore, we recommend performing clustering with different choices of these parameters, 
and looking at the full set of results in order to see what patterns consistently emerge
We must be careful about how the results of a clustering analysis are reported. These 
results should not be taken as the absolute truth about a data set. Rather, they should 
constitute a starting point for the development of a scientific hypothesis and further study, 
preferably on an independent data set
91


PAGE 92
Clustering for categorical data
1.
Cluster using e.g., k-means or HDBSCAN, based on only the continuous 
features!
2.
Encode the categorical data before clustering with e.g., k-means or 
HDBSCAN
3.
Use k-prototypes to directly cluster the mixed data
See here
4.
Use factor analysis of mixed data to reduce the mixed data to a set of derived 
continuous features which can then be clustered
92


PAGE 93
Conclusions
Unsupervised learning is important for understanding the variation and 
grouping structure of a set of unlabeled data, and can be a useful pre-processor 
for supervised learning  
It is intrinsically more difficult than supervised learning because there is no 
gold standard (like an outcome variable) and no single objective (like test set 
accuracy)
It is an active field of research, with many recently developed tools. See The 
Elements of Statistical Learning, chapter 14
93


PAGE 94
Conclusions
Going further
Manifold learning
Self-supervised learning
Deep learning
Graphical models
Bayesian data analysis
…
Practical topics (https://phonchi.github.io/nsysu-math608/materials/)
Data cleaning, feature engineering
Database and SQL
Model serving …
Pretrained and transfer learning
High-performance and distributed computing
94


PAGE 95
Appendix
95


PAGE 96
Additional topics
Tensor decomposition
http://tensorly.org/stable/index.html
Manifold learning
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/manifold.html
Spectral clustering 
https://jlmelville.github.io/smallvis/spectral.html
Mixture models
https://cs229.stanford.edu/syllabus.html
https://cs229.stanford.edu/notes2021fall/cs229-notes7b.pdf
Variational Bayesian Gaussian Mixture
96


PAGE 97
Self-supervised learning
https://speech.ee.ntu.edu.tw/~hylee/ml/ml2021-course-data/bert_v8.pdf
97


PAGE 98
More on PCA – Connection with SVD and EVD
In practice, we will often scale data before PCA 
Whiten data matrix (identity covariance matrix)
XVΛ−1/2
ZCA (Close to original data (often not reduce dimension))
XVΛ−1/2𝑉𝑇
98


PAGE 99
Perplexity, a smooth measure of the # of neighbors
To choose the appropriate 𝜎𝑖
2, SNE performs a binary search for the value of 𝜎𝑖
that makes the entropy of the distribution over neighbors equal to log2(𝑘), 
where 𝑘is the hyper-parameter perplexity or the effective number of local 
neighbors. The perplexity is defined as:
𝑘= 2𝐻(𝑃𝑖), where 𝐻𝑃𝑖= −σ𝑗𝑝𝑗|𝑖log2 𝑝𝑗|𝑖
Another consequence is that since the Gaussian kernel is used, the probability of being a 
neighbor decreases sharply for any point 𝑥𝑗that lies outside of the neighborhood of a point 
𝑥𝑖, and the neighborhood is determined exactly by 𝜎𝑖
2
99


PAGE 100
Clustering analysis - Example
For instance, suppose that we have a set of 𝑛observations, each with 𝑝
features
The 𝑛observations could correspond to tissue samples for patients with breast 
cancer, and the 𝑝features could correspond to measurements collected for each 
tissue sample; these could be clinical measurements, such as tumor stage or grade, 
or they could be gene expression measurements
We may have a reason to believe that there is some heterogeneity among the 𝑛
tissue samples; for instance, perhaps there are a few different unknown subtypes of 
breast cancer
Clustering could be used to find these subgroups. This is an unsupervised problem 
because we are trying to discover structure—in this case, distinct clusters—on the 
basis of a data set
100


PAGE 101
Mean shift
If you don’t want to have to specify the number of clusters. It is centroid based, 
like K-Means, but can return clusters instead of a partition
The underlying idea of the Mean Shift algorithm is that there exists some 
probability density function from which the data is drawn, and tries to place 
centroids of clusters at the maxima of that density function
It approximates this via kernel density estimation techniques, and the key 
parameter is then the bandwidth of the kernel used
101


PAGE 102
Mean shift
1.
We begin with a circular sliding window centered at a point 𝑥𝑖(randomly 
selected) and having radius 𝑟as the kernel.
2.
Given a candidate centroid 𝑥𝑖for iteration 𝑡, the candidate is updated 
according to the following equation:
1.
The means are shifted to the high density region 
3.
We continue shifting the sliding window according to the mean until there is 
no direction at which a shift can accommodate more points inside the kernel
4.
This process of steps 1 to 3 is done with many sliding window
102


PAGE 103
Example
103
https://medium.com/temp08050309-devpblog/cv-7-segmentation-as-clustering-k-means-
mixture-of-gaussians-mean-shift-fe94d39bd2fc
https://towardsdatascience.com/the-5-clustering-algorithms-data-scientists-need-to-know-
a36d136ef68


PAGE 104
Clustering as a preprocessing method
104
Longitude
Latitude
Cluster
D_C0 …
D_C3
-93.619
42.054
3
1.25
5.24
-93.619
42.053
3
3.56
3.33
-93.638
42.060
1
5.21
0.89
-93.602
41.988
0
7.83
4.31
Clustering can be an efficient approach to 
dimensionality reduction, in particular as a 
preprocessing step before a supervised learning 
algorithm
Cluster labels as a feature
The motivating idea for adding cluster labels is 
that the clusters will break up complicated 
relationships across features into simpler 
chunks. Our model can then just learn the 
simpler chunks one-by-one instead having to 
learn the complicated whole all at once
Distance to cluster centers can also be good 
features
Feature agglomeration by pooling function


PAGE 105
Clustering for semi-supervised learning
Another use case for clustering is in semi-supervised learning, when we have 
plenty of unlabeled instances and very few labeled instances
We can first cluster all the data points and ask for the label of the images that are most 
close to the cluster center
Using this images to train classifier may be much better than random instances 
We can also propagated the labels to all the other instances in the same cluster. This is 
called label propagation
105


PAGE 106
Practical issues
Should the observations or features first be standardized in some way? For 
instance, maybe the variables should be centered to have mean zero and scaled 
to have standard deviation one. What dissimilarity measure should be used?
In the case of hierarchical clustering,
What type of linkage should be used?
How many clusters to choose? (in both 𝐾-means or hierarchical clustering). 
Difficult problem. No agreed-upon method. See Elements of Statistical 
Learning, chapter 13 for more details
106
